I'm sorry I cannot show you my face
because if I do the bad guys will come
at me my journey started 14 years ago I
was a young reporter I had just come out
of college then I got a scoop the scoop
was quite a very simple story police
officers were taking bribes from jacquez
who were walking on the streets as a
young reporter I thought that I should
do it in a different way so that it has
a maximum impact
since everybody knew that was happening
and yet there was nothing that was
keeping it out of the system so I
decided to go there and act as a seller
as part of selling I was able to
document the hardcore evidence the
impact was great it was fantastic this
is what many call image in journalism or
undercover journalist I am an undercover
journalist my journalism is hinged on
three basic principles naming shaming
and jelly journalism is about results is
about affecting your community or your
society in the most progressive way I
have went on this for over 14 years and
I can tell you the results are very good
one story that comes to mind in my
undercover pieces is spirituality it was
about children who were born with
deformities and the parents felt that
once they were born with those
deformities they were no good enough to
live in the society so they were given
some concoction to take and as a result
they died so I built a prosthetic baby
and I went into the village pretended as
though this baby had been born with a
deformity and here was the guys who do
the killing they got themselves ready in
a bid to hell I got the police on a
standby and they came that fateful
morning to come and kill the child I
recall how they were seriously boiling
called a concoction put it on fire
boiling hot getting ready to give to the
kids while this was going on the police
had a letter deputies do understand by
and just as the concussion was ready and
they were about to give it to their kids
I phoned the police and fortunately they
came and busted them as I speak now yeah
before the courts don't forget the key
principals naming shaming and jelly the
court process is taking place and I'm
very sure at the end of the day we'll
find them and put them where they belong
to another key story that comes to mind
which relates to this spiritual
phenomenon is the scale of the Albina
I'm sure most of you may have had in
Tanzania children who are born with
albinism as sometimes considered as
being unfit to live in the society their
bodies are chopped off with machetes and
is supposed to be used for some
concoctions or some potions for people
to get money or some many many stories
people say about it
it was time to go undercover again so I
went undercover as a man who was
interested in this particular business
of course again a prosthetic arm was
built for the first time I filmed on
hidden camera the guys who do this and
they were ready to buy the arm and they
were ready to use it to prepare those
potions for people I am blood today the
Tanzanian government has taken action
but the key issue is that the Tanzanian
government could have only taken action
because the evidence was available my
journalism is about hardcore evidence if
I say you have stolen I show you the
evidence that you have stolen I show you
how you stole it
and when or what you use what you had
stolen to do what is the essence of
journalism if it doesn't benefit society
my kind of journalism is a product of my
society I know that sometimes people
have their own criticisms about and
acaba journalism he brought out some
money from his pockets and put it on the
table that we should not be afraid he
wants to bring the cuckoo and send it
could've were so with my hidden
intention I kept quiet editing alter
awake by my colleagues didn't know so
after after collection of the money when
he left we were waiting for him to bring
the goose we decide immediately he left
our to my colleague that since I was the
leader of the group I told my colleagues
that if they come arrest them I don't
even know the place called bribery I've
never stepped there before so I'm
surprised you see a hunt counting money
just in front of me
the next moment you see the money in my
hands counting whereas I'm not coming
contact with anybody I've not done any
business anybody when Metro News
contacted investigative reporter and US
Army are asked for his reaction he just
smiled and gave this video extract he
did not use in the documentary recently
shown on screen
the officer who earlier denied
involvement picks a calculator to
compute the amount of money they will
charge on the cocoa to be smuggled this
was another story on anti-corruption and
here was him denying but you see when
you have the hard core evidence you are
able to affect susai
sometimes these are some of the
headlines that come it's not something
which is unknown to many of us but
please those of you who are agents and
while leading the customs officers into
temptation I'm telling you Ghana is not
going to see any good things to you
about that was my precedent I thought
that I couldn't come here without giving
you something special I have a piece and
I'm excited that I'm sharing it for the
first time with you here I have been
undercover in the prisons
I have been there for a long time and I
can tell you what I saw is not nice but
again I can only affect society and
affect government if I bring out the
hardcore evidence many times the prison
authorities have denied ever having
issues of drug abuse issues of sodomy
issues of so many issues they would deny
that it never happens
how can you obtain the hardcore evidence
so I was in the prison now what you are
seeing is a pile of dead bodies now I
happen to have followed one of my
inmates one of my friends from his
sickbed to death and I can tell you it
was not a nice thing at all the way
issues of bad food being served as I
recall that some of the food I ate it's
just not good for a human being toilet
facilities very bad I mean you had to
kill to get proper toilets to attend to
and that is what I even call proper when
the four of us I want a man who it is
something that if you narrated to
somebody the person wouldn't believe the
only way that you can let the person
believe is when you show hardcore
evidence of course drugs was abandoned
it was easier to get cannabis heroine
and cocaine
even in the prison than outside the
prison if bullying the society is an
extreme disease if you have extreme
diseases you need to get extreme
remedies my kind of day another might
not fit in other continents or other
countries but I can tell you it works in
my part of the continent Africa because
usually when people talk about
corruption they ask where is the
evidence show me the evidence I say this
is the evidence and that has aided in me
putting a lot of people behind bars
you see we on the continent I tell the
story better because we face the
conditions and we see the conditions
that is why I was particularly excited
when we launched our Africa investigates
series where we investigated a lot of
African countries as a result of the
success of Africa investigates series we
are moving on to world investigates by
the end of it a lot more bad guys on our
continent we would put behind bars
this will not stop I'm going to carry on
with this kind of journalism because I
know that when evil men destroy good men
must build and Bank thank you very much
thank you thank you I have I have some
questions for you how did you end up in
jail this is just a few weeks ago I
believe yeah sure you know and a camera
is all about setting the priorities
right so we got people to take me to
courts and so I went through their very
legal process because at the end of the
day the prison authorities who want to
check what I indeed you have been there
or not and that's how I got in there
also someone someone sued you in court
and they took you there and you were in
remand custody for part of it yes and
you did that deliberately yes yeah yes
talk to me just about about fear and how
you how you manage that because you're
you're regularly putting your life at
risk how do you how do you do that you
see and acaba is always a last resort
before we go undercover we follow the
rules and I am only comfortable and I'm
paid off here whenever I am sure that
all the steps have been taken I don't do
it alone I have a backup team who help
ensure that the safety and all that
systems are put in place but you've got
to take very intelligent decisions
whenever they are happening if you don't
you end up losing your life so yes when
the backup systems are put in place I'm
okay I go in risky yes but I mean it's a
hazard of a profession I mean everybody
has the hazard and once you say that is
yours you've got to take it as and when
it comes well your amazing human and
you've done amazing work and you told us
a story like no story I think any of us
have heard before and we're appreciative
we salute you thank you so much thank
you
[Applause]
[Music]
you